America is more disabled than it has ever been
before. Despite advances in medical technology,
better treatments, and a better understanding of
nutrition and health, the size of the disabled
population has grown by more than 30% within the
last 5 years alone, despite the total population
only growing by 3%. For 3 years after CO, the
number of disabled people in America was growing
faster than the number of people in America. In
some counties across the country, more than one in
three people are out of work due to a disability.
And support payments are now the second largest
budget item for the Social Security Administration
after retirement benefits. Disability payments now
cost more money every year than food stamps
and welfare combined by a significant margin.
In some towns across America, banks and stores
stay open late for one night a month, the day
that disability checks become available. This is
clearly a big enough problem by itself, but there
is a lot more going on behind these numbers, which
tell a rather scary story about everything from
the ways we decide if people are worthy to work,
regional inequality, and the long-term realities
of AI in the workplace. I know it sounds unhinged,
but I promise it's all connected. You might not
believe it, but people didn't magically just
become more disabled overnight. Nor are certain
areas of the country somehow just 400% more
accident prone than others. So why the has
America really become so disabled? Daniel Waldrip
suffered with chronic back pain for 20 years. It
was getting progressively worse through the years.
It just became part of life. Employment rate for
US workers with disabilities increased to about
12.6%. Proposed cuts to Medicaid are creating a
deep sense of fear among 15 million Americans with
disabilities who rely on that program. Back pain
is the second most common reason that people
go to the doctor in the United States. and the
leading cause of disability in Americans under
the age of 45. One of the recent challenges of
addressing the disability epidemic is that nobody
really wants to acknowledge it for two separate
reasons. The first is that there really are a lot
of vulnerable people out there that genuinely need
this assistance to survive. I hope it's not too
much of a hot take to say that if we can afford
more aircraft carriers than the rest of the
world combined, we can afford to look after our
own people. But even just daring to question the
validity of some of these numbers is a dangerous
game because no politician wants to be seen
pushing society's most vulnerable people off vital
support. Not directly anyway, and we will get to
that later. The second and more honest reason is
that people who are out of work due to disability
do not show up on unemployment statistics. To be
officially classified as unemployed, you need to
not have a job and be actively looking for work,
adhering to some pretty rigid requirements.
People who are disabled enough to receive support
payments normally don't meet these requirements
even if they are willing to work. So they just
get counted as outside the labor force. If
this was thoroughly reclassified, it might
reveal that job losses are a fair bit worse than
we would all like to admit. And spoiler alert,
there may be a reason why spikes in disability
applications line up almost perfectly with spikes
in long-term unemployment. But I am getting
ahead of myself. The first thing you need to
know is exactly what kind of disabilities we are
getting. A report by NPR and data from the Social
Security Administration found that diagnoses of
disabled workers had changed dramatically over the
decades. And these changes were not what you would
expect. From when the data was first collected
to when the report was published, the rate of
heart disease, stroke, neurological disorders,
and broadly defined other disabilities all dropped
significantly. This is surprising because since
the 1960s, the average American has put on a few
pounds. To put it lightly, what exactly are you
trying to say? What exactly am I trying to say?
These are a bunch of [__] elephants. Anyway,
it's good to know that as someone who personally
enjoys some high fructose corn syrup from time to
time, both the reduction in cardiovascular and
neurological disorders was thanks to improved
treatments, which means that medical issues
that would have made people unemployable in
the 1960s can now be managed effectively enough
that people can live totally normal lives. This
is particularly impressive when you remember that
you can't be disabled if you are dead. Improving
the survivability of something like a heart attack
also increases the likelihood of that person being
disabled by the incident instead of just killed by
it. So medical treatments have improved and then
improved even more to overcome the problems caused
by their statistical improvements. With such
amazing new technology and procedures, we should
surely be living through a golden age of health,
right? But clearly we aren't. So then what
has taken their place and made up most of the
increases in disability? Well, it's been mental
illness, which isn't surprising since we have
gotten much better at diagnosing these. But above
all, by a wide margin, the biggest increase has
been in back pain and other spinal problems,
which are now more than four times as common
as they were back when we started collecting this
data. These are now the most common diagnoses that
make people unable to work, at least so far as the
government is concerned. Now, it's at this point
that you might understandably get a bit suspicious
of the data because conveniently, these kinds of
disabilities don't show as many physical symptoms
and therefore are a lot easier to fake. This is
especially suspicious if everybody within a local
area is all coming down with the same disabilities
when just a few counties over people don't seem
to have the same problems. To make matters worse,
I am going to guess that most of you know someone
who can still get a day's work done despite their
back pain. Well, the author of this report, Hana
Joffy Walt, actually thought the same thing. So,
they went to interview a doctor in one of the most
disabled counties in the country and got a pretty
startling insight into how this whole system
actually worked. One of the doctor's primary
concerns was what level of education his patients
had attained. According to the report, he very
candidly explained that even though this was not a
medical question, it was one of the most important
variables when it came to treating disabling
illnesses. People who had graduated high school or
obtained a college degree had a much better chance
of finding a job where they could sit down if they
needed to, like those in an office or even just
a call center. People who did not have a formal
education, however, would most likely be working
jobs behind a counter, making deliveries, or doing
manual labor where they were expected to be on
their feet all day. Someone with chronic back pain
could work an office job, but even a retail job
that required them to stand for an entire shift
would be impossible. In the interview, the doctor
rather hauntingly said that if you have particular
back pain and a college degree, you're not
disabled. Without a college degree, you are. This
was a bigger problem in poorer rural working-class
areas where sit-down jobs were more scarce anyway,
which is just one of the reasons why disability
lines up almost perfectly with poverty. People in
poorer areas are not necessarily more disabled.
They just have fewer options outside of giving
up and claiming disability. But that is just
one reason, and it's clearly still the sign of
a broken system that's not really helping anybody.
And the worst part is that a lot of these problems
would be extremely easy to fix without spending
nearly as much. So, it's time to learn how many
works to find out what these convenient numbers
are really covering up. This video was made
possible by Plaude. Have you ever walked out of
a meeting thinking, "What did we even talk about
for the last half hour?" Or maybe you've had
moments where you really wanted to take notes,
but you were too busy actually being present. It's
the difference between a meeting that's actually
worthwhile and something that should have been
just an email. Luckily, there's a solution. It's
called the Plaude Note. An AI tool that actually
helps you do better work instead of just replacing
work with generated slop. Plaud builds cutting
edge tools that help you stay focused on the
moment by taking care of all your note-taking and
summarizing. The Notepen is one of their standout
products. It's a small wearable device that you
clip onto your shirt, bag, or lanyard. With one
press, it records your conversations, voice memos,
and meetings, then transcribes and organizes them
into smart summaries you can review later. You can
use it during your lectures, meetings, interviews,
anytime you need to capture everything. I've been
using my notepin on my morning walks when creative
ideas hit. Instead of stopping to grab my phone or
scramble for a notebook, I just tap the notepin,
talk it out, and later in the app, it's all turned
into a clear mind map or action list. It saved
me so much mental load. It allows you to take
notes anywhere, anytime. It extracts insights,
boosts efficiencies, and saves you time. And
you can fully engage in any conversation. You
can check it out and get yours using the link
in the description. The NPR article that first
reported on the questionable relationship between
disability and poverty was first published over a
decade ago now. Now, it's still genuinely one
of the best pieces of journalism I have read
in a long time. So, I will leave a link to
it below. However, since then, the number of
people receiving disability support payments has
actually gone down, especially amongst people of
working age, which sounds like a good thing,
right? Well, not exactly. Since 2014, when
support payments peaked, the number of disabled
people has increased by more than 7 million,
and we still don't have concrete data on people
suffering from symptoms of long co. So with more
disabled people but less people getting disability
support, the actual improvements have really just
been made in bureaucracy. According to data
from the Social Security Administration itself,
the fastest growing group of applicants are those
waiting to see if they are eligible to receive
support payments at all. Just the statistical
increase in administrative delay accounts for
almost all of the reductions seen in people
on disability support. Successive governments
have realized that cutting down on staff at the
Social Security Administration not only reduces
costs from the payroll itself, but it also
means that there are less people available
to process support requests, which conveniently
saves money in a less direct way. According to
the administration's own data visualized by
the Urban Institute, wait times for people
just seeing if they are eligible for support
have more than doubled. And in certain states,
people are now waiting for over a year just to see
if they can be technically qualified as disabled
to qualify for support. People who genuinely need
the support don't normally have the means to wait
this long. So, they are just giving up and either
relying on family or falling into poverty. The
rest of the reduction in disability support is
made up of people who are denied on technical
grounds rather than medical grounds. According to
the law firms that regularly process these claims,
the hoops to jump through in order to receive
support have become significantly more difficult,
and denials can be made for any number of reasons
at any point throughout the year-long process.
The reason for these denials can include not
adhering to a regular treatment schedule,
which does sound reasonable, but can be almost
impossible for people without insurance or an
income. Another reason could be moving in with
family members while waiting for support. If
their household income is too high, it can be
grounds for denial. Since these reports are
coming out of law firms, there is also some
natural selection bias towards claimants who
can well afford to pay for lawyers. This is yet
another reason why wealthier areas tend to have
lower reported rates of disability. In places
with better job opportunities, it becomes worth
it to pay for support in order to maintain gainful
employment. Disability payments are not going to
cover the cost of living in most areas with even
a moderate cost of living. And in poorer areas,
treatments are going to cost more than most people
will pay in taxes from even a full-time job. So,
unfortunately, the simplest solution has become
to just throw some cash their way and ignore the
problem. Now, the federal government has pushed
back on this trend because they saw it becoming
a massive cost center that was just being abused.
And hot take alert, they were absolutely right,
just not in the way you might expect. There are
a lot of people who are making a lot of money
off the so-called disability industrial complex.
It's just not the people receiving the payments
themselves. The first group is a growing roster
of consulting firms. Unemployment welfare costs
are paid in part by state governments. This was
pushed heavily by the federal government as a
way to motivate state governments to get their
people back to work. This did work to bring down
the people on this type of support, but not
really in the way that old Billy Boy might
have hoped. States quickly realized that they
had to share the cost of unemployment benefits,
but not disability benefits. This created an
opportunity for private consulting companies
to work with state governments to go through
their welfare roles to try and find people that
could qualify as disabled. According to a specific
example from the NPR report, Missouri was paying
these firms $2,300 per person who they could move
off of unemployment benefits and onto disability
benefits. Since these consulting firms were paid
on a per person basis, they would allegedly talk
to people directly and give them advice on how
to play up their symptoms and think of additional
medical problems they might have. For the state,
it was a great deal because they wouldn't have to
pay to cover for these services anymore. And they
would have more federal funding coming into the
state through disability payments. This let state
politicians talk about their fiscally conservative
credentials by actively exploiting welfare
programs. Clearly for the country at large,
this was not a good idea because most people
who receive unemployment benefits eventually
rejoin the workforce. People on disability are far
less likely even if they would be physically able.
The second group that have really benefited from
all of this are the lawyers. Many law offices now
specialize exclusively in processing and pushing
through disability claims. And the more the system
gets bogged down in bureaucracy, the more money
they stand to make. So yeah, yet another system
that was originally made to perform a basic
function that has been corrupted by misaligned
incentives, and now it's too profitable to repeal.
Throw in some depressing graphs and welcome to
basically every video on this channel. However,
the bigger problem with the disability industrial
complex is what it's covering up. The job market
has clearly changed a lot since we started playing
these games with welfare back in the mid1 1990s.
China entered the World Trade Organization and
outsourcing pushed entire regions into redundancy.
The idea for a long time was that people would be
retrained into more technical roles to replace
the basic manufacturing jobs that were lost.
For individuals who had spent their entire lives
working with their hands, it was a bit optimistic
to expect them to just learn to code. And for
certain regions, it has been devastating. Those
who could leave areas in the rust belt already
have predominantly younger workers follow job
opportunities and according to the data they are
earning good incomes compared to the national
average. Those who were left behind have suffered
as opportunities have gone elsewhere alongside
young educated workers. People aren't more likely
to be disabled in these areas. They are just more
likely to be in the group that stays. Today,
however, the script is reversing once again.
People who have spent their lives learning to
code or perform basically any job where they
sit behind a computer are being told they are
right on the edge of being replaced by AI. So,
they better start learning to work with their
hands again. As I was researching this very video,
Marvin Ellison, the CEO of Lowe's, made headlines
for telling his employees to stay away from the
corporate office and as close to the cash register
as possible if they didn't want to be laid off and
replaced by AI. That's a little bit tone-deaf from
the guy that will be doing the laying off. But if
the promises of the AI CEOs are to be believed,
he might not be wrong. The problem is that this
could further expose the disability gap. Because
remember, there are lots of disabled people that
can work behind a computer but can't work in
physical roles. Now, making big loud warnings
about AI systems taking everybody's job is a great
way for tech companies to raise a lot of money
from people who like the idea of cutting out labor
costs. So, you need to take these warnings with a
bucket of salt. What isn't hypothetical, though,
is that we are getting older. Age naturally
makes disability more prevalent, and it's also
increasing the expectation that we will work later
into our lives at the same time. The demographic
problems that come with an aging population are
far beyond the scope of this video. But so far as
being able to get to work as we get old, there are
some simple realities we need to accept. Some jobs
can easily be done into old age. Others cannot.
According to the Harvard Law Review, the average
age of a federal court judge is now 69 years old,
two years above the normal retirement age outlined
by the Social Security Administration. And don't
even get me started on the Senate. Anyway, these
are prestigious jobs that are not physically
demanding and come with a lot of support built in.
A job like a roofer or boiler maker is simply not
going to be as easy for older people to do. If we
want people to start scaling into more physical
jobs, we also need to accept that they will not be
able to work as long or else all of the problems
with our current disability system are going to
get exponentially worse. But it doesn't need to
be this extreme. There are a lot of easy and best
of all cheap changes that could be made right now
that would go a long way to unf--ing this mess.
Letting retail workers sit at checkouts instead
of standing in place all day immediately makes
one of the most common jobs in the country far
more accessible. So does encouraging businesses
to let people work from home. Right to sit laws do
exist for already disabled people as a reasonable
accommodation. But in the real world, that puts
them at a disadvantage when trying to get or keep
a job where standing is the expectation. Right
to sit laws actually used to be universal for
everybody across almost every single state. But
they were slowly repealed because large employers,
in particular McDonald's Ray Croc, lobbied state
governments arguing that it made workers look
unprofessional and lazy. Using slogans like, "If
you got time to lean, you've got time to clean."
Simple changes like this won't fix the problem
entirely, but they will help without costing much,
and they should be politically popular, too. To
the people that think assistance recipients are
just ripping off the taxpayer, this gets rid of an
excuse. And to everybody else, it makes it easier
to get their work done, all while helping people
help themselves. But of course, we won't do it
because business incentives bad decisions. Go and
watch this video next to find out why we keep on
making the same kind of dumb mistakes and why they
are so hard to correct. And don't forget to like
and subscribe to keep on learning how money works.